was again coordinating their activities with the
registrar and admissions liaison with the
president, provost, activities there, dealing
with the curriculum matters, those kinds of
things. Ed was excellent to work with in the sense
that obviously there were times when people
thought they should be admitted He was always
perfectly willing to counsel with those people.
If my staff wasn't able to handle it and I was not
able to handle it, then Ed would take over the chore
and would handle the situation. I think Ed was
always fair with the students on the thing. He was
fairly fair with us.
Obviously, sometimes he felt the student should
be admitted when somebody else may not have, and
that was all right, too. I mean, it was his job to
make that decision, I think. Sometimes did he
overrule a decision you all made on admissions?
Yeah, in a sense that we had a kind of an appeals
process fixed up. Not only a written appeal thing,
which Ed was involved in, a lot of times, but verbal
appeals. A lot of times, a person might come to
Gale, for instance, and want to be admitted, and it
didn't meet requirements, and they weren't
satisfied with talking to Gale, so they'd want to
talk with me, and they'd talk with me, and they
weren't satisfied talking to me, and they'd want
to talk with Ed. And there were some occasions when
Ed felt that they should be admitted after maybe I
had recommended they not be. I just told him that I
couldn't admit them, but they're perfectly
welcome to talk to the dean if they want to. And he
sometimes would see it the way I did, and sometimes
would see it differently the way I did, which
didn't make any difference to me. What was the most
common argument for this person to be admitted who
didn't meet the stated remission requirements?
What was their most
likely argument? reason?
It's hard to say. Probably the fact that, you know,
I know he hasn't done it, but I know he's got the
ability to do it, and it's just a matter of him
getting down to do it. These kinds of things. I'll
give you a couple of examples, like at least one,
two, of things, you know, they never got to Ed, but
there are appeals, I think. One, was a young man who
had multiple
dystrophy, I believe. He was confined to a
wheelchair, and I do not, he was a muscle problem
and that. And he
came, I guess they set up an interview probably.
Anyway, talked with he and his parents, come to
find out his parents were both graduates of the
University of Texas in Austin, but for some reason
he decided he wouldn't come to Texas A&M. And that
was the time, if you remember Haskell, we really
didn't have great facilities for students who
were in wheelchairs. We were working on it and
doing a reasonable job, I think. But they had
talked, I believe, with the people in the
handicapped student's office. I don't know what
it was called at that time. But they were satisfied
that he could handle a situation and that they
would provide him with whatever help that he might
need on the thing. And anyway, they wanted him
admitted.
And it wasn't that, I don't remember exactly, I
feel relatively sure he had met the admission
requirement. There was certainly some concern
about his being able to handle them. For example,
they could just get him admitted for a year. They
didn't think he'd live a year. Well, he got
admitted and not only did he live a year, he lived
long enough to graduate And in talking with one of
our former regents who knows him quite well, he is
now a lawyer and doing very well. The young man, you
know, he's married, has, I think, a family. But
anyway, it's a real success story in the fact that
that. I have another girl, and I do not know really
whatever happened to her. I don't know that she did
graduate. She had rheumatoid arthritis so bad
that she could barely get along. Her hands were
crippled and she was kind of pumped. And again, her
parents were asking and I'm not too sure, I don't
think that they had a problem, but something had
happened that she didn't meet admission
requirements. But anyway, we admitted her and
sure enough, four years later I saw her graduate by
walking across the stage. And it's those kind of
things which made the experience that I
I remember the success stories, a few of them, a
whole lot more than I remember those that we turned
down. And a lot of them that we admitted,
periodically some kid would come by and says, just
wanted to let you know you admitted me, you made an
exception, and I graduated. And I even received,
at one time, a copy of a diploma in a tube the guy had
sent me. And he says, I just wanted you to know that I
made it. And I still have a copy of the diploma in
there. Now, were these appeals for admission,
were they any more likely to come from small towns
than big cities or working class, white collar?
Was there any generalization about the kind of
families they came from and geographically? As I
recall, they did. I mean, it's kind of across the
board. The thing which I enjoyed... in the early
years was the fact that we were
given the opportunity if we thought an exception
should be made to make it. For the most part, I told
my staff that if you think an exception ought to be
made, go ahead and make it. You don't have to come to
me and ask about it. If you want to, fine, we'll
discuss it. But you can do that. I felt I had the same
thing with Dean Cooper. He never said, don't make
any exceptions. He says, you admit those you think
should be admitted. But at the same time, he says,
if you want my input on the thing, I'll be glad to do
that on the thing. Did you ever get any
communication, letter, phone call, or anything
else from anyone, quote, in the higher
administration to admit so-and-so? In the
administration, yeah. Again, if the president
felt someone should be admitted or the vice
president president or provost, whom everyone
felt somebody should be admitted, that was their
prerogative. But I'm thinking about at this
point, Williams and Byers or Williams and
Calhoun, was it their style to communicate with
you or Ed and say, I got a letter and I told them that
so-and-so would be admitted?
Or would they pass it down to you or Ed? They would
generally pass it down to Ed. I got very few calls
directly. And we, I guess in all honesty, we got
very few demands for admitting students.
And I soon learned, at least in my mind as a
rationalization, that it wasn't worth making
some person who could do the university some good
to make them mad just because we didn't feel a
student could be admitted. I never hesitated to
tell anybody that I thought it was a mistake as far
as the student is concerned because in the fact
we're doing the student a disservice I think
rather than doing some particular person a
disservice on the time. We had one chancellor who I
really enjoyed working with in the sense that he
never called and said he'd met somebody. He often
called and said, would you look at a person's
application and tell me what you think about it.
Who is that? All right. Because to me that's
complimentary. It is. It's Dr. Atkinson. Perry
Atkinson. Perry Atkinson. And I don't recall that
he was always, would you look and see what you've
got and let me know. And usually I wouldn't. I would
always look, and I would say, here's why I think we
shouldn't, or there may be a chance if you feel like
we should. And most oftentimes, he said, I think
you're right. It would not be a good service to the
student. Because that seems to me to be a very
sensitive and thoughtful way to handle it. Let's
go back to Williams and Calhoun replaced Byers.
and not long after Dr. Williams got here, describe
working with them. I was pretty well insulated, I
think. Ed worked with them mostly. Occasionally,
Dr. Williams would call and ask about a student, as
I recall, but very seldom. Generally, what
contact we had with it was through Ed's office on
there. And when did you all move over to the new
building? The new building, that was Heaton Hall?
Yeah.
Early 80s, I guess. I was in charge of remodeling
the thing. The old bookstore. The old bookstore,
yeah. People asked, where are you? And I said,
we're in Heaton Hall. They said, well, where is
that? And I said, well, do you remember the old
bookstore? And they said, no. And I said, do you
remember the old laundry? And so it had three or
four different functions over the years. Oh, I'd
forgotten. It was the laundry before it was the
bookstore, wasn't it? I think it was the laundry
before the bookstore. so people you would
recognize it from that and at least 70s and you had
good space then yeah and we had good space we had
more than uh we had where we were that's for sure uh
it It wasn't the best of locations in the sense that
it had no parking around it. But as far as we as
operating in there were concerned, we had
adequate space. And as we got different kinds of
equipment, it even got a little better. We had
originally planned to move the old photostat
machine over there, which is a monster. which was
taking up a lot of room. Back at the time, just
before we got ready to move it over, they decided,
no, we're not going to move that. We're going to go
with a different kind of a transcript maker. So we
didn't have to do that, which gave us a little more
space there in the registrar's side of the thing.
Did you have to worry with transcripts, or was
admissions only? Admissions only. I didn't have
to worry about the transcripts with all of the
records keeping. Summarize the... ritual
routine problems of transfer admissions?
Transfer admissions is a real problem in the sense
that students would take coursework at other
schools which may or may not fit in with our
curriculum here. It got better as statewide we
began to get more cooperation I think as I recall
and you may remember too through some legislation
which was done probably which required schools to
do certain things but the admissions and
registrars
throughout the state had gotten together too and
were doing a lot of cooperative work so that we had
some core courses which we could all identify with
in the first two years. And you get into your upper
division courses, then it got a little more
complicated as far as what course would be
equivalent to another course. But the transfer
students
comprised
about
I guess, of our new students each year. I may be
wrong on that, but most of them came in in
September. We had a good number come in in January.
We had very few freshmen come in in January term.
And we worked with the junior colleges throughout
the state trying to give them our course numbers
and their equivalents so that a student, if he went
to another junior college or community college,
they would know from the very beginning what
courses they ought to take in order to have that
account for a specific course at Texas A&M. It
worked real well as long as the student didn't
start changing curriculum. When the student
would start out in beds and didn't want to change
over to engineering, obviously, quote, he lost
some courses. He didn't really lose the course
credit, but he had courses which he couldn't use on
that program. Had he been at A&M and done the same
thing, he would have still been in the same
situation, though. But that's where the, that's
usually, it's always the biggest gripe. I lost
hours when I transferred to Texas A&M, and they
really didn't lose them. They had taken
coursework, which wouldn't count on a degree
program. Were there any big transfer sources for
us? Did we get more transfers from these schools?
Well, the biggest one probably was still Blinn,
because a lot of students went to Blinn and they
were transferring. When they opened the campus
here in Bryan, it really got to be a feeder source.
got a lot from Houston Community College, you'd
get a lot from Tarrant County Community College
system and from Dallas where they had, and San
Antonio, where they had the big community
colleges. Some of the smaller community colleges
you might have given two or three a year, but others
you'd give fifty, a hundred, or whatever the
situation may be. And were any of the programs here
getting more transfers than the others?
Probably, and probably because they were larger.
I mean, I'm sure engineering, I'm guessing now,
would probably get more transfers than would,
say, liberal arts, maybe, or some of the smaller
colleges at that time. As the liberal arts college
got bigger, they were probably getting more
transfer students, too. But early on, it was
mostly agriculture and engineering. Which
institutions were the most pleasant to work with
on transfers?
I really don't know what I could say. I didn't work
directly and transfer it with them that way, but we
had, I think, a good working relationship with
most all of them. We knew each other through the
professional organizations. And, you know, if we
had a problem, I can remember a fellow at Tyler
Junior College But again, if he had a problem, if a
kid came in and said, I've got a problem, can't get
something transferred, he wouldn't fuss. He'd
call us up and say, what's going on down there? And
we could usually work out the problem on the thing.
A lot of times, parents would fuss, would complain
back to the community college. It was a matter of,
and I say miscommunication, either we didn't
communicate properly or the student hadn't done
what they were supposed to do to begin with. But we
tried, and I really thank you, we had a good working
relationship with all the community colleges. We
tried to, early on, they had college days just like
the high schools did, and we would try to have a
representative teach one of the junior college
college days so we could talk to the students as
well as talk to the representative from the
college to let them know what courses they needed
to take and how to google that transfer and so forth
and i'm assuming that many of the problems i'm
putting the word problem in quotation marks from
the student and or the parents point of view came
from the student's failure to communicate
clearly to the parents what the problem was with
the transfer With the loss of hours, as you were
mentioning a while ago, with the failure for the
student to take at the junior college the kinds of
courses that would be countable toward a degree
here. I mean, that's probably correct. Again, we
felt like we were doing a very good job in letting
the student know what they should take.
Obviously, some things fell through the cracks,
but if the student planned, we thought, there was
no reason why they couldn't Just interface from
the community college right over into the
university without any loss at all. And I think for
the most part, most of them probably did. All
right, now we're going from 71 in your service to
what year? 19, January 93 is when I retired. Okay,
so 22 years. In those 22 years, did we become more
selective gradually in admissions? Yes. Do you
remember any particular times when those changes
were made? I think we went to, I recall that we
started off at top half and 800 on the SAT, and I
don't remember the, I think at 18 on the ACT, but I
may be wrong on that, but let's talk about SAT. We
went from that, and I believe it was in the early,
80s that we jumped to a criteria which said uh 1200
in the bottom quarter 1100 in the second quarter
and a thousand in the top quarter with an automatic
admission now if you had less than the thousand the
top quarter and I think down to 800 we would we did in
what we call a review process where we would look
individually at the application to see what
courses they took what high school they came from
what their scores were what letters of
recommendation they may have and so forth so we had
an automatic admission we had a those admitted by
review Then we had those who were denied, and then
those who were denied fit again fit into the two
categories of summer school and not summer
school. However, at that time, summer school
became more restrictive in that we limited the
number that we could take because we had to, as we
began to put in some kinds of enrollment control,
which started somewhere around 86, 87, I've
forgotten what it was. We had to make some kind of
prediction of how many we were going to get out of
the summer school. So we would know, we tried to get
a freshman class of X number at that time. So we were
restricting it more and more toward a limited
enrollment of freshmen. How were those admission
decisions, admission requirement decisions? Do
you remember how they were made, how they were
shaped? And where I'm headed is, were those
changes made in a fashion that you think, in
hindsight, worked well? Statistically, I think
they were. I think they were, the cutoff scores and
stuff were, they were run through models which the
the Academic Counseling Center, is that the
correct term? The Management and Testing, excuse
me, that's what it is. They ran some models, and
they said if the students meet these
requirements, they ought to be able to go ahead and
graduate. And then it says there are others who, if
they meet certain requirements, still should be
able to. But again, we wanted to, for ease of
operation, I mean, probably, If I had had my
druthers, we would have operated like the
University of North Carolina did in that they
review every application individually. Well, we
just didn't have the staff to review every
application individually and they were not
inclined, and I don't know that we asked for, to
give us a staff to do that. It just takes a lot of
people. They had, I think when I visited, when they
had 24 reviewers working year-round, I had a
director of freshman admissions and three clerks
or something like this. So we decided that we would
take a group that we felt comfortable with and
admit those automatically. Another group which
we felt could probably be successful but we
couldn't take them all but try to review those and
take the best ones out of there and again apply not
just the criteria class rank and a test score which
is those two are together are the best predictors
they're not perfect but they're the best but there
are some others who there are other factors which
we could consider oh now we're now we're into
important territory so stay with this let's make
believe that that I'm the Senate now and what if you
only had one factor what would be the most
important factor to look at is it class rank or is it
test score
I I would look at class rank if I only had one factor
to look at. I would look at where he ranks in that
class. Okay, now let's go to the other extreme.
What is the best of all possible combinations
based on your experience? Well, again, I think the
combination of test score and class rank is the
biggest two predictors. All right, but what else?
Would you look at anything else? Yeah, I would want
to look at the high school they came from. whether,
again, class rank in a small school is important,
class rank in a big school is important. You can
look at other activities which they participate
in, whether you're talking about athletics or
whether you're talking about for the class
officers or their extracurricular activities
and things like that, which they did. Some
students, well, they had to work to help support
the family. Some students, I'm sure, were on their
own even, those kind of things. And it's hard, you
know, you get down, when you get past, I think,
class rank and test score, there are a lot of little
things which can add to it. Which one is the most
important? I would hate to say, but there are a lot
of factors which you can look at and make a better
overall picture on the thing, though. In terms of
the likelihood of their success at A&M,
of the activities in high school, which were the
most valuable activities?
Is being a class officer more important than
athletics? is being involved in a number of
organizations?
I don't know I need to say I think I really think the
leadership properties are probably very
important to them and I can think of an example when
we were this is early on we were really trying to get
National Merit students here and I remember I
don't know what the situation was. We reviewed the
page. I don't even remember the student, if I could
even call his name. But he had about two pages of
activities. Excellent work, everything else.
And he got up here and he busted out after a year.
because he didn't have his priorities straight.
He was still participating in all the
extracurricular activities and everything, and
I think he stayed out a year or two. I think he came
back, and I think he graduated and did well, but
it's one of those things when if you look at it on
paper, there's no way in the world he could
possibly not succeed. But that's the other
factor, which is so intangible, and that's their
motivation and their application and things like
this. And that's where a lot of times you can take a
student, after you've talked to them a while, I
think you get a feel as to how they're going to
perform and do certain things. I mean, obviously,
if they don't have some of the academic
background, they're not going to be successful.
But if they've got the what I would call the minimum
academic background. And if they're willing to
work hard, if they come from a family which values
work, discipline, and things like this, I'd take a
chance on them because I think they would be
successful. They're not going to be a 4.0 student,
but they're going to graduate. And as we know from
looking at statistics, a lot of those who
graduated with minimal scores have done very well
in the business world. What about if they came from
a non-native American born parent or parents? Is
that an advantage or a disadvantage in a marginal
student's admission?
Their parents immigrated from somewhere. Again,
I don't know. I wouldn't want to talk to the
student. I want to look at their academic
background and so forth and sometimes even
talking to their parents or knowing what their
parents have done and everything because I think
that sometimes the immigrants can instill in the
students a worth ethic, which to me is still one of
the most important things, that they've got a good
worth. work ethic, they can overcome some of the
other things. They have to maybe do different
things. They've got to have some good counseling
when they get here and I always
encouraged a student to not think they had to
graduate in four years sometimes because
sometimes they have to take the pace a little bit
slower especially a lot of students are then and
now are you know working And a lot of them are taking
much longer because of having to work or wanting to
work, depending on which one it may be. Like I heard
the other day that somebody had seen an interview
on national TV with Dat Nguyen and our, is it Dat or
Nat? Dat. Dat Nguyen, our fine linebacker, and his
parents. And according to the person who watched
the program, that his parents are barely,
competent in speaking English. That wouldn't
surprise me. I think a lot of the first generation
Vietnamese have not acquired a real skill with the
language. But here he's done well. Income level
would you give if a person was from a poor family as
compared to a middle class or upper class family
and marginal Would you and your folks have been
more likely to give that person a little extra
chance on admission?
There may have been times. I'm not saying we, if a
kid had come from them. an impoverished
background, either financially or otherwise,
but had worked hard and showed determination to
succeed on the thing, yeah, we probably would give
them a chance. Again, I think that's one of those
intangibles which you can't see on paper. You can
talk to people in this kind of thing. But where it
looks like they're overcoming some kind of a
handicap, to me, which would indicate a good work
ethic, we would probably have given them a chance
on the thing. Right. So we become gradually more
selective in the 70s and 80s in admissions here, is
that correct? That's correct. Do you remember any
specific change that caused more ripples than any
other? Was there a time when the admission
requirement was modified and there were more
howls?
I think there were howls. We've had to limit the
number, and it got worse early in the 90s, where we
had to limit the number of freshmen that we can
admit. I mean, we set the limit. Who set that limit,
as far as you know?
When you say who set it, obviously the president
set it. Or the board, let me put it that way, it had to
go to the board. The board set the limit if they
wanted the student body to be, and I think the
figure was 40,000. To keep it at 40,000, I think
they decided that if you start off with 6,000
freshmen and allow X number of transfers to-